Okay, here are the major discussion points from the OCWG meeting, organized as requested:

*   **Spec 0.2 Implementation Readiness:** The group discussed the readiness of spec 0.2 for implementation, moving beyond proof-of-concept. It's agreed that the spec is at a point where a full implementation should be attempted.
*   **Note Rotation Center:** The discussion centered on aligning the rotational center of a note with its positioning point, which is currently defined as top-left in the spec. It was agreed that the rotation center should also be top-left to maintain consistency.
*   **Styling CSS:** Max acknowledged some extraneous CSS he added to the spec and confirmed it would be removed. This was a minor point and easily addressed.
*   **Resources and IDs: Lists vs Maps:** The group debated the use of lists vs. maps for storing resources with IDs, ultimately deciding to stick with lists due to better error messages during parsing when duplicate IDs are introduced.
*   **Rendering Order of Notes:**  The group discussed how the order of notes in a list affects the rendering order, noting this was a fallback mechanism, and that indexing could be used as well, but that order of keys in a map was not reliable.
*   **Design Decisions Documentation:** It was agreed that the reasoning behind choosing lists over maps for storing resources needed to be documented. This also created an action item for a short ADR.
*   **Note Extensions:** The meeting reviewed the structure of note extensions using the 'ports' extension as an example. It was decided that extensions would be stored within the data array of a note and include a "type" field for the extension itself
*   **Relative Constraints Extension:** A new "relative constraints" extension was proposed for nodes positioned relative to other nodes, using position and rotation deltas. This extension was discussed as potentially being a relation type, but was ultimately decided as a node extension.
*   **Relations Structure:** The structure of relations was discussed. Relations were defined as having an ID, a type (which might become deprecated as per discussion about the base relation), and a data array for extensions. Various relation types like set, edge, and hyper-edge were covered in detail.
*   **Group Relation Semantics:** The group discussed the semantics of groups, including nested groups, delete behavior, and ungroup behavior. This section of the spec was identified as requiring more precision.
*   **Parent/Child Inheritance:** The use of a parent/child relation for inheritance was discussed. It was pointed out that properties can be inherited using this relation.
*   **Assets and Resources:** The structure for defining assets and resources was reviewed, with a focus on how data URIs imply mime types and content. It was established that specified mime types on a data uri will be ignored in favor of the mime type within the URI itself.
*   **Schemas Definition:** The schema definitions were reviewed, covering inline, external, and remote schemas, along with how names can be used to refer to schemas instead of URIs. The consensus was to switch to using an array for schemas and to have schema names as optional.
*   **Schema Bundling:** There was a robust discussion about bundling schemas within the ocif file itself or referencing them externally. The recommendation is to bundle schemas for a more complete, self-contained file.
*   **Extension Description:**  A need for a description field for extensions was noted, to aid human authors in usage and LLMs in learning about their purpose. The need for documentation of extensions was also raised. 
*   **Built-in Schema Mappings:** The discussion covered the idea of built-in schema mappings and extension versioning, as well as the idea of turning every relation into an extension of the base relation.
*   **Magic Key "Type":** The group identified the "type" key as a potential conflict and discussed alternatives, eventually considering "ext type" as a better descriptor for extension types, but agreed to stick with "type" for the time being.
*    **Node and Relation Unification:** The idea of unifying nodes and relations was discussed, removing the need for type on either, but rather extending them with different extensions
*   **Internal Type Definitions:** A list of internally used types like angles, IDs, and mime types was discussed to be formalized in the spec. 
*   **Extension Documentation:**  The need for a standardized way to document extensions was discussed. This includes the location (GitHub repo folder), required files (JSON schema and readme.md), and the content of the readme.md file.
*  **Tooling for ocif:** The group discussed the need for tooling for working with ocif files including a bundler for hydrating an ocif file with external resources and schemas. 
*   **Relative Constraints as Node Extension vs Relation:** After discussing the nature of the relative constraints extension, it was ultimately decided that it should be a node extension rather than a relation extension. 
*  **Validation Tooling:** There was a general agreement that tooling should be created to assist with validation based on the schema. 
*  **Implementation of OCWG spec:** It was suggested that an implementation of the spec should be created with an existing canvas and the group mentioned a few existing specs for such an implementation including Obsidian Canvas, Teal draw and Scalar Draw.

**Action Items:**

*   Max: Change the rotation point in the spec to top-left.
*   Max: Remove the weird CSS from the spec.
*   Max: Update the spec to use arrays for schemas instead of a map.
*   Group: Document the reasoning for using lists over maps as an ADR.
*   Group: Investigate and document (in a readme.md) a structure for documenting extensions.
*   Group: Decide which relation types are truly built-in and should be part of the main spec vs. being extensions.
*   Group: Decide which node types are truly built-in.
*   Group: decide on whether or not the "type" key in extensions is a viable naming convention.
*   Group: Review all internal types to define precisely.
*   Group: Create a command line tool that can hydrate ocif files with schemas and resources.

**Takeaways:**

*   Spec 0.2 is nearing implementation readiness.
*   Consistency in data structures (using lists) is prioritized for better error handling during parsing.
*   The spec should be more explicit in defining the semantics of common elements like Groups.
*   Bundling schemas within the ocif file itself should be the recommendation for the most complete experience.
*   Documentation is a crucial piece for both human and machine understanding of extensions.
*   The group should consider creating examples to validate the feasibility of the spec
