Here's a summary of the major discussion points, action items, and takeaways from the OCWG meeting transcript:

**Major Discussion Points:**

*   **GitHub Spec Handling:** Discussed different approaches for managing the spec on GitHub, including creating candidate branches for new versions, copying files, and utilizing GitHub's PR tools for review and comparison of changes.
*   **Directory Structure and Versioning:** Explored various directory structures for the spec, considering current, draft, and archive versions. The group explored options for calling the current directory, the pros and cons of using `current` and `Vx.x`
*   **Versioning Pragmatics:** Decided to preface all version numbers with "V" to facilitate quick find and replace operations and avoid ambiguity and agreed to include instructions for versioning in the spec.
*   **Spec 0.4 Release Content:** Reviewed the content of the upcoming 0.4 release, especially namespace changes, and also discussed specifying that changes are not breaking or no enhancements or no changes to existing..
*   **Future of Coding Meetup Presentation:** Discussed the possibility of presenting the spec at the Future of Coding meetup, highlighting integrations.
*   **tldraw Integration and Outreach:** Shared updates on outreach efforts and documentation requests related to the tldraw format and explored potential integration of OCIF with tldraw.
*   **Obsidian Canvas Integration:** Talked about creating a bidirectional converter between Obsidian Canvas files and OCIF, and explored using JSON transformation tools.
*   **Universal OCIF Merge:** Brainstormed a universal OCIF merge tool, and how to merge different OCIF files with data and property bags.
*   **OCIF Validation Tool:** Discussed the creation of an OCIF validation tool to verify file validity, resolve pointers, and enforce consistency, potentially leveraging JSON schema tooling.

**Action Items:**

*   **Document new versioning process:** Document how to create a new version of the spec, including copying files, creating PRs, and renaming folders
*   **Issue for Prefacing with "V":** Create a GitHub issue to track the progress of prefixing all version numbers with "V" and making necessary file changes.
*   **Create OCIF Validation Tool:** Create a project focused on OCIF validation to verify files and report errors.
*   **Investigate JQ for Obsidian Canvas Conversion:** Investigate using JQ or similar JSON transformation tools to convert Obsidian Canvas files to OCIF.

**Takeaways:**

*   The group will move forward with creating candidate branches for new spec versions and utilizing GitHub's PR tools for review.
*   Prioritizing the creation of an OCIF validation tool is seen as a valuable next step.
*   Exploring JSON transformation tools could be a feasible approach for Obsidian Canvas integration.

